PROs have gained increasing attention as key endpoints that can contribute to regulatory approval both in pivotal ATTR-CM studies and in HF trials more broadly. HR-QoL represents a patient-centered measure of disease burden. In a survey of patients with HF, 61% attached more weight to QoL over longevity; 9% and 14% reported they would trade 6 or 12 months of life for improved health and quality of life.
[3](#core-collateral-bib3) PROs can provide a more holistic evaluation of how treatments and procedures may impact the patient as an individual and can help improve shared decision-making, treatment escalation, and the assessment of treatment response.
[4](#core-collateral-bib4) A recent analysis comparing the HF validated Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ) and Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ), and the nondisease specific Euro-Qol 5 dimension-5 levels (EQ-5D-5 L) in ATTR-CM found EQ-5D-5 L (includes Visual Analog Scale) and MLHFQ were predictors of all-cause mortality independent of biomarkers and all 3 questionnaires were predictive of combined all-cause mortality and HF-related hospitalization after adjustment for biomarkers.
[5](#core-collateral-bib5) However, there have been notable examples wherein patient-reported improvement is uncoupled from improved clinical outcome, such as inotropes in HF, which improves QoL without improving prognosis, and alternatively beta-blockers, which have been shown to improve HF prognosis but may worsen QoL acutely.
[6](#core-collateral-bib6),[7](#core-collateral-bib7) Therefore, the aim of PROs should be to capture the full patient experience living with the disease. Cardiovascular outcomes, like all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and HF hospitalization, have strong precedent in driving approval by the FDA but typically require large numbers of patients and long periods of follow-up to accrue sufficient events. However, there is a shift in FDA approval, such as with tricuspid transcatheter edge-to-edge repair, which was approved mainly on the basis of PRO and HR-QoL highlighting a recognition that symptom improvement and functional status, demonstrated by substantial and durable improvements in KCCQ score and NYHA functional class, are important to patients and clinically significant.
[8](#core-collateral-bib8) In light of three FDA-approved therapies making placebo-controlled trials unethical and progressively “less sick” populations enrolled in ATTR-CM trials over time, CV outcome trials in ATTR-CM will be increasingly challenging and costly. In this context, recent ATTR-CM trials have favored composite endpoints or “win” ratio approaches that include functional endpoints like 6-minute walk distance, patient-reported outcome measures like KCCQ, used in combination with traditional CV outcomes like CV mortality, HF hospitalization, and worsening HF events.
[9](#core-collateral-bib9) CV morbidity should not be the only lens to view disease progression in a complex syndrome.
PROs not only help to understand the total patient experience but also may be used to follow treatment effect, monitor for decline, or compare different treatments in ATTR-CM. Though caution should be exercised when directly comparing outcomes between trials, it is instructive to see consistent slowing in the decline of HR-QoL in ATTR-CM trials. In the ATTR-ACT trial, tafamidis was observed to slow the decline of all components of KCCQ scores with a mean difference in change of 13 with over 40% of patients treated with tafamidis having no change or an improvement in KCCQ scores at 30 months.
[10](#core-collateral-bib10) During an extension study that continued follow-up through 60 months, the reduction in the decline of HR-QoL effect of tafamidis was still seen.
[11](#core-collateral-bib11) Acoramidis led to improved quality of life assessed by KCCQ as well over 30 months with a mean difference in change of 9.94 points.
[9](#core-collateral-bib9) The recent vutrisiran in patients with transthyretin amyloidosis trial showed vutrisiran resulted in less decline of KCCQ score with least squares mean difference of 5.8 points.
[12](#core-collateral-bib12) Importantly, the baseline characteristics of these trials are markedly different with the placebo arm of Helios-B (vutisaran vs placebo) with better all-cause survival than the treatment arm of ATTR-ACT (tafamidis vs placebo).
[13](#core-collateral-bib13)