### Participants
We included participants of the cross-sectional part of the MACUSTAR study. The MACUSTAR study is a multi-centre cohort study investigating functional, structural and patient-reported outcomes in intermediate AMD. It is conducted at 20 study sites across seven European countries, from which 18 sites recruited participants for the cross-sectional part referred to in this report[16](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR16 "Finger, R. P. et al. MACUSTAR: Development and clinical validation of functional, structural, and patient-reported endpoints in intermediate age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmologica. J. Int. d’ophtalmologie. Int. J. Ophthalmol. Zeitschrift fur Augenheilkunde 241, 61–72 (2019)."),[17](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR17 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Clinical study protocol for a low-interventional study in intermediate age-related macular degeneration developing novel clinical endpoints for interventional clinical trials with a regulatory and patient access intention-MACUSTAR. Trials 21, 659 (2020).").
In summary, 586 participants with intermediate AMD and 133 control participants with bilateral early AMD (n = 34), late AMD (n = 43) or no AMD (n = 56) were recruited for the MACUSTAR study from early 2018. The disease categorization of AMD followed the Beckman classification[18](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR18 "Ferris, F. L. et al. Clinical classification of age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmology 120, 844–851 (2013)."). Comprehensive six- to twelve-monthly assessments including visual function testing, multimodal imaging and administration of PROMs were performed in all participants with intermediate AMD or early AMD within the longitudinal part of MACUSTAR.
Within the cross-sectional part of the MACUSTAR study, 168 participants with bilateral intermediate AMD and all control participants attended an additional retest visit scheduled 2 weeks (± 1 week) after the baseline visit. Acquisition of functional, structural and patient-reported data followed procedure manuals specifically developed for the study and all functional data underwent a formal, pre-specified review procedure on a semi-annual basis to ensure that the multi-centre setting of MACUSTAR does not compromise data quality. Imaging data were graded by a central reading centre (GRADE Reading Center, University Hospital Bonn, Germany)[16](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR16 "Finger, R. P. et al. MACUSTAR: Development and clinical validation of functional, structural, and patient-reported endpoints in intermediate age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmologica. J. Int. d’ophtalmologie. Int. J. Ophthalmol. Zeitschrift fur Augenheilkunde 241, 61–72 (2019)."),[17](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR17 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Clinical study protocol for a low-interventional study in intermediate age-related macular degeneration developing novel clinical endpoints for interventional clinical trials with a regulatory and patient access intention-MACUSTAR. Trials 21, 659 (2020).").
We included only participants with AMD in our analysis and thus excluded healthy controls (Supplementary Figure). We also excluded participants who only participated in the longitudinal part, where disease stage was allowed to be asymmetric.
The study protocol and additional information on the conduct of the MACUSTAR study have been published previously[16](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR16 "Finger, R. P. et al. MACUSTAR: Development and clinical validation of functional, structural, and patient-reported endpoints in intermediate age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmologica. J. Int. d’ophtalmologie. Int. J. Ophthalmol. Zeitschrift fur Augenheilkunde 241, 61–72 (2019)."),[17](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR17 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Clinical study protocol for a low-interventional study in intermediate age-related macular degeneration developing novel clinical endpoints for interventional clinical trials with a regulatory and patient access intention-MACUSTAR. Trials 21, 659 (2020).") and can be found on the study website [www.MACUSTAR.eu](http://www.MACUSTAR.eu). Ethics committees at all participating study sites approved the conduct of the MACUSTAR study and it followed the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided written informed consent. The clinicaltrials.gov registration identifier is NCT03349801.
### Vision Impairment in Low Luminance (VILL) questionnaire
The VILL questionnaire is a 33-item PROM assessing vision-related quality of life in individuals with AMD, specifically designed for future use in intermediate AMD clinical trials. Its item pool was developed with extensive patient input (in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, cognitive debriefs in people with AMD) and it focuses on the visual difficulties in low-luminance and low-contrast situations which is frequently reported by people with AMD[8](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR8 "Pondorfer, S. G. et al. Development of the vision impairment in low luminance questionnaire. Transl. Vis. Sci. & Technol. 10, 5 (2021)."). An initial 37 item-version of the VILL was reduced to a final set of 33 items based on the MACUSTAR data[6](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR6 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Disease-specific assessment of Vision Impairment in Low Luminance in age-related macular degeneration - a MACUSTAR study report. Br. J. Ophthalmol.
                  https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-320848
                 (2022)."),[8](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR8 "Pondorfer, S. G. et al. Development of the vision impairment in low luminance questionnaire. Transl. Vis. Sci. & Technol. 10, 5 (2021)."). The VILL includes items from the three independent subscales “reading and accessing information” (17 items, “reading”), “mobility and safety (12 items, “mobility”) and “emotional well-being” (4 items, “emotional”). The response scale of the VILL includes four response options per item and a separate response option ”not applicable”. The VILL is scored through Rasch models which have been established and psychometrically validated in the MACUSTAR cohort previously[6](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR6 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Disease-specific assessment of Vision Impairment in Low Luminance in age-related macular degeneration - a MACUSTAR study report. Br. J. Ophthalmol.
                  https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-320848
                 (2022)."),[8](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR8 "Pondorfer, S. G. et al. Development of the vision impairment in low luminance questionnaire. Transl. Vis. Sci. & Technol. 10, 5 (2021).").
The VILL has been shown to be an internally consistent, test–retest reliable, content and construct valid PROM which yields similar scores across modes of administration (interview administration, self-administration via paper and electronic self-administration)[6](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR6 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Disease-specific assessment of Vision Impairment in Low Luminance in age-related macular degeneration - a MACUSTAR study report. Br. J. Ophthalmol.
                  https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-320848
                 (2022)."),[9](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR9 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Interviewer administration corresponds to self-administration of the Vision Impairment in Low Luminance (VILL) questionnaire. Transl. Vis. Sci. & Technol. 11, 21 (2022)."). Within MACUSTAR, the VILL was administered in a standardized manner, using a PROM administration manual by the clinical site personnel in the respective local language[6](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR6 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Disease-specific assessment of Vision Impairment in Low Luminance in age-related macular degeneration - a MACUSTAR study report. Br. J. Ophthalmol.
                  https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2021-320848
                 (2022)."),[17](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR17 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Clinical study protocol for a low-interventional study in intermediate age-related macular degeneration developing novel clinical endpoints for interventional clinical trials with a regulatory and patient access intention-MACUSTAR. Trials 21, 659 (2020).").
### Visual function assessments
Visual function assessments implemented in the MACUSTAR study include best-corrected (BCVA) and low-luminance visual acuity (LLVA), Moorfields acuity (MA), Pelli-Robson chart contrast sensitivity (PR-CS), mesopic and scotopic fundus-controlled perimetry (microperimetry; S-MAIA, CenterVue, Padova, Italy) as well as dark adaptometry (AdaptDx, Maculogix, Pennsylvania, USA). The assessments available from both eyes were selected as main read-outs for in this study, i.e. BCVA [logMAR], LLVA [logMAR], MA [logMAR] and PR-CS [logCS], which are all chart-based. In a supplemental analysis, average threshold from mesopic and scotpic microperimetry (mAT and sAT [dB]) as well as rod intercept time from dark adaptometry (RIT [min]) were also considered. However, mAT, sATm, and RIT were only available for one eye, which was not necessarily the better eye (i.e., the eye with higher BCVA). Reading performance was also assessed in the MACUSTAR study but not considered in our analysis due to the performance-based nature of reading speed assessments, contrasting the other visual function metrics assessed.
All functional testing procedures were conducted by specifically trained and tested staff that followed specific testing protocols as reported previously[5](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR5 "Dunbar, H. M. P. et al. Repeatability and discriminatory power of chart-based visual function tests in individuals with age-related macular degeneration: A MACUSTAR study report. JAMA Ophthalmol. 140, 780–789 (2022)."),[17](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR17 "Terheyden, J. H. et al. Clinical study protocol for a low-interventional study in intermediate age-related macular degeneration developing novel clinical endpoints for interventional clinical trials with a regulatory and patient access intention-MACUSTAR. Trials 21, 659 (2020)."),[19](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR19 "Higgins, B. E. et al. Test-retest variability and discriminatory power of measurements from microperimetry and dark adaptation assessment in people with intermediate age-related macular degeneration - A MACUSTAR study report. Transl. Vis. Sci. & Technol. 12, 19 (2023)."). Visual function testing was conducted separately on both eyes in the MACUSTAR study. Following the study protocol, both eyes had the same AMD stage. Previous research supports that visual function of both eyes impacts vision-related quality of life[20](#ref-CR20 "Nickels, S. et al. Vision-related quality of life considering both eyes: results from the German population-based Gutenberg Health Study (GHS). Health Qual. Life Outcomes 17, 98 (2019)."),[21](#ref-CR21 "Finger, R. P. et al. Visual impairment as a function of visual acuity in both eyes and its impact on patient reported preferences. PLoS ONE 8, e81042 (2013)."),[22](#ref-CR22 "Vu, H. T. V., Keeffe, J. E., McCarty, C. A. & Taylor, H. R. Impact of unilateral and bilateral vision loss on quality of life. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 89, 360–363 (2005)."),[23](/articles/s41598-025-14553-4#ref-CR23 "Hirneiss, C. The impact of a better-seeing eye and a worse-seeing eye on vision-related quality of life. Clin. Ophthalmol. (Auckland, N.Z.) 8(1703), 1709 (2014)."), which was the rationale for including only the visual function assessments that were available from both eyes in our main analysis. In a supplemental analysis, data from only the study eyes were considered, which were selected based on better visual acuity at screening if both eyes were considered eligible.
### Statistical analysis
To investigate the relationship between the VILL subscale person measures and the above-mentioned visual function parameters of both eyes in all participants with AMD, we fitted linear regression models with VILL person measures as dependent variables and the respective functional parameters as independent variables, controlling for age, sex, and AMD stage. Next, we fitted linear regression models using the same approach in the intermediate AMD subgroup, which is the main target population of the MACUSTAR study. All analyses were conducted using R (version 4.3.0, R Core Team, Vienna, Austria). P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.